 
 
 
 
Statement of 
General Stephen R. Lyons, United States Army 
Commander, United States Transportation Command 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Before the Senate Armed Services Committee 
On the State of the Command 
25 FEBRUARY 2020 
  
----------------Page (0) Break----------------
1 
 
Delivering for our Nation 
U.S. Transportation Command (USTRANSCOM) exists as a combatant command to 
project and sustain combat power at a time and place of the Nation’s choosing.  Powered by 
dedicated Active Duty, National Guard, Reserve and civilian men and women, we underwrite the 
lethality of the Joint Force, we advance American security interests around the globe, and we 
provide our Nation’s leaders with strategic flexibility to select from a range of options while 
creating multiple dilemmas for our potential adversaries. 
USTRANSCOM’s mission is to conduct globally integrated mobility operations, lead the 
broader Joint Deployment and Distribution Enterprise, and provide enabling capabilities in order 
to project and sustain the Joint Force in support of national objectives.  We accomplish this by 
balancing strategic mobility requirements for the Secretary of Defense and executing the Unified 
Command Plan roles and responsibilities assigned by the President.  USTRANSCOM’s mission 
is executed through three component commands and one subordinate command: the U.S. Army’s 
Military Surface Deployment and Distribution Command, the U.S. Navy’s Military Sealift 
Command, the U.S. Air Force’s Air Mobility Command, and the Joint Enabling Capabilities 
Command.   
The National Defense Strategy (NDS) calls on the Joint Force to be strategically 
predictable with allies and partners while being operationally unpredictable to competitors.  
USTRANSCOM was custom built for such a mission.  We enable dynamic force employment and 
deliver options daily.  In 2019, USTRANSCOM executed 43 brigade-sized overseas movements 
totaling over 26 million square feet of military cargo in support of all six Geographic Combatant 
Commands. In the air, USTRANSCOM operated from all seven continents.  We transported 1.9 
million passengers and 1.3 million tons of cargo, and during air-to-air refueling operations we 
----------------Page (1) Break----------------
2 
 
dispensed 956.6 million gallons of fuel.  Our aerial evacuation crews executed 6,609 patient 
movements, including 84 with battle injuries.  One evacuation in particular stands out as 
highlighting how USTRANSCOM integrates the incredible capabilities of our Joint Force to 
protect American interests globally.  Last August, a U.S. soldier with life-threatening wounds 
required immediate evacuation from Afghanistan to a stateside hospital for complex trauma 
treatment.  A team of 18 joint medical professionals—armed with key life-saving capabilities—
made a 19-hr non-stop flight from Afghanistan to Texas aboard a USTRANSCOM aircraft.  The 
soldier is alive today because of the U.S. values embodied in the Joint Force and enabled daily by 
USTRANSCOM.  
As envisioned in the NDS, our operational focus has shifted from routine force rotations in 
Southwest Asia to posturing for Great Power Competition globally.  Our accomplishments from 
2019 underscore USTRANSCOM’s ability to respond anywhere in the world at scale, in order to 
assure our allies, deter our adversaries, and ensure our national leaders always have options.  
Strategic Environment  
 The world is changing.  In the past, we were able to deploy our forces when we wanted, 
assemble them where we wanted, and employ them how we wanted.  In the future, the NDS calls 
us to be able to project and sustain the Joint Force under persistent, all-domain attack.  Our 
competitors, such as China and Russia, clearly recognize the United States’ ability to rapidly scale 
and deliver the Joint Force globally as a strategic comparative advantage, and they seek to deny it.  
Today, adversaries are active in the cyber domain.  They infiltrate contract value chains.  They 
invest in critical global choke points.  They attempt to erode geopolitical access.  They develop 
increasingly potent anti-access and area-denial weapons.  These are clear indicators of their intent 
and reflect the changing character of war.  In the future, strategic mobility will remain critical to 
----------------Page (2) Break----------------
3 
 
delivering dynamic and credible response options to guarantee our national security interests.  
Strengthened by a historic past but with a critical eye towards the future, USTRANSCOM aims to 
remain ready to answer our nation’s call.  
USTRANSCOM’s Warfighting Framework 
The key to conducting globally-integrated mobility operations is the dynamic 
synchronization of our 1) global mobility posture, 2) global mobility transportation capacity, and 
3) global command, control, and integration.  These critical elements create USTRANSCOM’s 
warfighting framework and allow USTRANSCOM to respond to strategic priorities in both time 
and space. 
Global Mobility Posture 
Global Mobility Posture is the foundation of power projection, starting in the Continental 
United States (CONUS) with Department of Defense (DOD) installations and the seaports, 
railways, and the highways that connect them.  In close coordination with the Department of 
Transportation, the Strategic Seaport Program, Strategic Corridor Rail Network, and Strategic 
Highway Network provide 23 strategic seaports, 15 alternate seaports, 37,000 miles of strategic 
railways, and over 62,000 miles of interstate and major highways to project combat power from 
the fort, to the port, and on to the battlefield.  
Beyond our nation’s borders, USTRANSCOM relies on a deep bench of allies and like-
minded partners that have stood with us for over 75 years in defense of freedom.  These allies and 
partners provide access to key regions and support a substantial basing and logistics system which 
expands our nation’s global reach.  Through a flexible, redundant, and resilient global posture, 
USTRANSCOM enables the DOD to project and sustain a combat credible force that can deter 
adversaries, protect our national security interests, and when necessary, respond to win decisively.  
----------------Page (3) Break----------------
4 
 
Global Mobility Capacity 
Global Mobility Capacity includes the transportation conveyances and platforms used to 
move troops, fuel, and equipment within global transportation networks, including rail, motor 
transport, sealift, aerial refueling, and airlift.  60-70% of USTRANSCOM’s mobility capacity 
resides in the reserve component, underscoring the importance of a Total Force approach. 
USTRANSCOM is inextricably linked to the commercial transportation industry which 
provides important augmentation in peace and war.  Utilizing commercial partners expands 
USTRANSCOM’s global reach as well as access to valuable commercial intermodal transportation 
systems and freight management capabilities, but carries with it vulnerabilities we will need to 
mitigate.  Emergency preparedness programs like the Civil Reserve Air Fleet (CRAF), and 
Voluntary Intermodal Sealift Agreement (VISA) augment USTRANSCOM’s global mobility 
capacity during contingency operations.  Incentive programs like the Maritime Security Program 
offset costs incurred to maintain a US-flagged fleet, strengthening the American sealift industry 
for both economic trade and national defense.  Currently, these programs are fully subscribed and 
funded.  This year, on behalf of the Department, USTRANSCOM is leading a Congressionally-
directed study on U.S.-flagged fuel tanker vessel capacity, evaluating accessibility to domestic and 
international tankers in order to satisfy the demands of the NDS in times of war.    
With 85 percent of the Joint Force based in CONUS, Global Mobility Capacity is critical 
in projecting overwhelming military force at a time and place of our Nation’s choosing, and it 
serves as a deterrent to conflict by demonstrating our ability to credibly defend our security 
commitments.  Overall, we assess USTRANSCOM’s global mobility capacity as adequate, but 
with elevated and increasing risk.  NDS requirements in daily competition and in times of war 
place high demands on aging mobility capabilities.  When coupled with adversaries that have the 
----------------Page (4) Break----------------
5 
 
capability and intent to contest our operations across all domains, it creates a daunting environment 
for future operations.  Specifically, USTRANSCOM assesses elevated risk in our two highest 
priorities:  Aerial Refueling and Sealift.  
Aerial Refueling 
The aerial refueling fleet is USTRANSCOM’s most-stressed capability and number one 
readiness concern.  The aerial refueling fleet continues to underpin the Joint Force’s ability to 
deploy an immediate force across all NDS mission areas and is comprised of KC-135, KC-10, and 
KC-46 aircraft.   
The KC-46 is an important aspect of tanker modernization as it will enable us to project 
and employ the force in a complex battlespace against a high-end adversary.  However, delays in 
delivery of capable KC-46s combined with reductions of KC-10s and KC-135s create a critical 
and deepening gap in taskable aerial refueling aircraft and aircrews for the next 5-7 years.  This 
combination of factors elevates risk to not only wartime missions, but also in day to day global 
operations across multiple combatant commands.  Reduced capacity limits options and constrains 
decision space for senior leaders in crisis, as they are confronted with an earlier mobilization 
timeline to generate adequate capacity.  For Combatant Commanders to compete daily, the 
Department must retain sufficient operational aerial refueling capacity to provide adequate support 
to the Joint Force during the transition to the KC-46.  As the timeline to field taskable KC-46s 
continues to evolve, USTRANSCOM recommends re-evaluating aerial refueling force structure 
plans annually.   
Sealift  
USTRANSCOM’s number two readiness concern is the Strategic Sealift Fleet.  The sealift 
fleet is responsible for moving approximately 90% of wartime cargo.  Sealift readiness rates have 
----------------Page (5) Break----------------
6 
 
declined to 59% compared against a goal of 85%, with vessel material condition and age as the 
primary factors.  Most sealift ships are reaching the age where maintenance and repair costs are 
escalating and service-life extensions will not yield proportional increases in readiness.  Starting 
in the mid-2020s, the sealift fleet will lose 1-2 million square feet of capacity each year as ships 
reach the end of their useful life.  That’s enough space to move two to four Brigade Combat Teams 
in a single voyage.  By the mid-2030s, over half the sealift fleet will be unusable, placing an 
unacceptable risk on the Joint Force, especially the Army, to deliver large-scale combat power 
over the ocean.  To prevent this detrimental loss of capacity, the Department needs to recapitalize 
the fleet with newer and more reliable vessels.  USTRANSCOM continues to support the Navy’s 
plan to acquire used vessels as the near-term solution that yields the greatest value.  Currently, 
Congress has provided authority to purchase seven vessels, and the Navy has provided funding for 
two in FY 2021.  This is an important first step to improve fleet reliability, but we have much work 
ahead to lay out a long-range plan. 
In September the DOD conducted the largest no-notice sealift activation exercise in the 
command’s history, assessing the entire fleet and activating over half the surge sealift vessels.  The 
exercise validated known concerns regarding the degraded readiness of the Organic Surge Fleet.  
Simply put, the surge fleet is challenged today to be immediately available for large-scale inter-
theater force deployment without delays or impacts to force closure.  These findings reinforce the 
need for recapitalization, appropriate levels of resourcing for maintenance and repair, and 
continued emphasis on readiness improvements.    
Global Command, Control, and Integration 
Global Command, Control, and Integration is central to our ability to make decisions at 
echelon to create desired mobility outcomes.  It creates shared understanding in order to align 
----------------Page (6) Break----------------
7 
 
scarce mobility resources consistent with the highest strategic priorities.  Global Command, 
Control, and Integration is imperative to retain our strategic comparative advantage to project and 
sustain the Joint Force globally.  As we prepare to confront the contested environments described 
in the NDS, we are working on several initiatives to strengthen mission assurance in the cyber 
domain, and advance decision making across the USTRANSCOM enterprise. 
Cyber Domain Mission Assurance 
 Cyberspace is a warfighting domain, without sanctuary, in which capable adversaries 
continuously attempt to degrade our Nation’s ability to project the Joint Force globally.  We 
continually evaluate our large and complex attack surface, evolve key cyber terrain, secure our 
cyber area of operations, and actively defend our ability to conduct global command and control. 
USTRANSCOM maintains a strong relationship with U.S. Cyber Command (USCYBERCOM) 
and the Intelligence community, providing increased understanding of adversaries’ intent.  Several 
rigorous exercises matured our ability to request active defensive measures from USCYBERCOM, 
leveraging their unique authorities to assure our global command and control in a contested 
environment.  In addition USTRANSCOM is pursuing numerous technical solutions to harden our 
key cyber terrain, to include a trusted transaction pilot with USCYBERCOM. 
 In Great Power Competition, we acknowledge our commercial partners are both a strength 
and a potential target.  Since 2017, we’ve contractually required our CRAF, VISA, and Universal 
Services Contract providers to perform annual self-assessments based on National Institute of 
Standards and Technology (NIST) standards for cybersecurity, and we use these self-assessments 
to identify vulnerability trends and share best practices with industry.  We continue to provide 
targeted recommendations to help our commercial partners improve their own cybersecurity.  
Lastly, we are reviewing data sharing requirements to limit our exposure to adversaries, and we’re 
----------------Page (7) Break----------------
8 
 
strengthening cybersecurity language in our information technology and software development 
contracts.  Overall, we assess our transportation providers are taking cybersecurity seriously, and 
the NIST standards will help them improve their security and resiliency – but commercial 
companies will always be challenged to keep out advanced persistent threat actors. 
 Advance Decision Making 
Information technology and computational processing continues to advance rapidly as we 
approach game changing capabilities like artificial intelligence, machine learning, and advanced 
analytics, all of which have enormous potential to improve USTRANSCOM mission outcomes.  
As we evolve to meet tomorrow’s challenges, we are enhancing our ability to understand the 
operational environment, improving our ability to develop options, and advancing our ability to 
make decisions at echelon.  Cloud computing, balanced cybersecurity, information sharing, 
innovation at echelon and warfighting outcomes serve as our guiding principles as we modernize 
our digital portfolio. 
The foundation for our success starts with data.  USTRANSCOM fully endorses the DOD’s 
Joint Enterprise Defense Infrastructure cloud capabilities and is an early adopter of cloud 
technology.  We have migrated 14 programs to a commercial cloud environment.  We are 
establishing an Enterprise Data Environment within the cloud, coupled with analytic technologies, 
to speed decision making, free up human capital, accelerate learning, reduce costs, and improve 
productivity.  
DEFENDER-Europe 20  
 DEFENDER-Europe 20 exemplifies how USTRANSCOM employs this warfighting 
framework and addresses the contested environment described by the NDS to deliver national 
objectives.  Over the next four months USTRANSCOM is executing the largest projection of force 
----------------Page (8) Break----------------
9 
 
to Europe in 25 years.  20,000 troops and 1.6 million square feet of military cargo will flow from 
26 CONUS origins through a diverse network of ports, move across simulated contested waters 
under the watch of Second and Sixth Fleets, and arrive as a combat credible force in EUCOM.  As 
we exercise the global posture, mobility capacity, and global command and control required to 
favorably shape Great Power Competition, DEFENDER-Europe 20 is a powerful opportunity to 
deter potential adversaries, strengthen alliances and partnerships, and evaluate future contested 
environments.  
Defense Personal Property Program (DP3) 
After assuming command in August 2018, I received letters from 15 members of Congress 
and more than 40 staff inquiries detailing service member concerns with the Defense Personal 
Property Program.  Issues with industry accountability, a shortage of quality capacity in summer 
months, and a general lack of transparency within the Department were common--and accurate--
criticisms.  Since that time--and after personal consultation with Service leaders and industry 
executives--USTRANSCOM worked to fundamentally restructure our relationship with industry 
to generate the quality capacity to meet DOD's peak demand and enable the Department to affix 
the accountability and responsibility missing in today's program.   
The FY2020 NDAA included several DP3-related provisions, including a requirement for 
a Business Case Analysis (BCA) on the Global Household Goods Contract (GHC) and a GAO 
report on the effects of this contract on DOD Families.  The BCA underscored the value of 
restructuring DOD's relationship with industry, while GAO's draft report makes helpful 
recommendations on overall DP3 management but highlights no flaws in our approach with GHC.  
The source selection process is underway and our initial review of proposals is encouraging, with 
credible candidates offering solutions to benefit DOD families at costs in-line with spending on 
----------------Page (9) Break----------------
10 
 
today's program.  We remain on track to award GHC to a single move manager this spring.  
Military Families have been our North Star throughout this process.  Thank you for your continued 
support to improve the relocation experience for DOD families. 
Executive Summary 
In summary, USTRANSCOM provides the DOD with the ability to project and sustain the 
Joint Force, deploying combat power to the right place, at the right time, and in the necessary scale 
to be immediate, lethal, and decisive.  Operating around the globe and around the clock, our ability 
to project military forces is a distinct advantage unmatched by any nation, and it serves as the 
cornerstone of the Joint Force’s ability to meet national objectives.   
Today, USTRANSCOM assesses our ability to execute the NDS as adequate, but with 
elevated and increasing risk, specifically in the areas of Aerial Refueling and Sealift.  Improving 
mission assurance within the cyber domain remains a USTRANSCOM top priority.  I thank 
Congress for their past and continued support of this organization as we work together to defend 
the nation and advance American interests. 
Our purpose is enduring, but our success is not guaranteed.  We must remain vigilant.  
Underwritten by the dedicated Soldiers, Sailors, Marines, Airmen, Coast Guardsmen, civilians, 
and commercial partners performing USTRANSCOM’s mission, I am confident in our ability, and 
I’m proud to stand with them in our collective commitment to our nation’s defense and dedication 
to America.  
Together, We Deliver! 
----------------Page (10) Break----------------
